vicars-choral-136
Notification, in the form of a cirograph, that John Roman canon of York, contemplating divine piety and for the salvation of his soul and the souls of his ancestors, has given the vicars 13s. 4d. from land in Gutherumgate which he bought with his own money (comparavi ex denariis meis), lying next to the messuage of the prebend of Susneubaude and [that] of the prebend of Wistowe; the money is to be paid to the vicars by the canon of the prebend of Wistowe at Martinmas and Pentecost; if the canon of Wistowe fails to pay the money within 8 days of the said terms, the vicars may enter the land and block the door (obstruere ostium) through which there is entry from the house of the canon of Wistowe, and they may dispose of the land as they see best but they may not alienate it. John Roman has also granted to the vicars an annual 10s. which Adam de Sunderlandwic gave him from land in the vill of Garton, payable at the said terms by the succentor and vice-chancellor of the church of York, and to be distributed together with the 13s. 4d. among the vicars and minor clerks of the same church who are present at John's obit. So that the distribution shall be made according to the said proportion, the chapter and the vicars, at John's wish, have excommunicated all who might presume to withhold the rent. Sealed with John's seal and the chapter's seal. Witnesses: Roger the dean, Geoffrey the precentor, William the treasurer, Walter archdeacon of Estrich', Godard, Erard, Robert de Harenis, Bernard, Maurice, canons, mag. John, Walter, Ralph, chaplains, Walter of the vestry (de revestiar'), Geoffrey Briton, John de Norfolch', canons of the chapel, John de Burgo, Philip, Peter Roman, Geoffrey, William de Jakellei, William de Insula, Nicholas, Robert, Thomas, Thomas the clerk, Henry, Alan, William son of William son of Sich', John de Warthil, John of Stayngate, Walter his brother, Thomas the goldsmith, William son of Herbert, Hugh son of Arnald, Robert son of Swan.  [1220 x 1228] SOURCE: CCA, DCc/Charta Antiqua Y5 (194 mm. x 188 mm.). Indented at top. ENDORSEMENT: Carta Johannis Romeyn, Gutherumgate; iuxta Sowthnewbald' ex parte boriali; de tenemento quod Robertus Underwod inhabitat. SEALS: (left) vesica (25 mm. x 22 mm.), red, impression of a man facing right ? holding a trumpet to his mouth, legend + IOhS E[ST N]OMEN EIUS (text in square brackets supplied from example attached to 137); (right) seal of dean and chapter, white (poor condition). COPY: VC 3/1/1, fo. 21r.—v. PRINTED: Historians of the Church of York, ed. J. Raine (Rolls Series, iii, 1894), 152-3 (from YML, L 2/2a, fo. 82).DATE: When Roger de Insula was dean and before Romeyn became subdean of York; it corrects the date given in the previously printed version. NOTE: This and the next charter both relate to the endowment of an obit for John le Romeyn the elder. A marginal note in the cartulary against the entry for this charter reads: alia fere concordat supra sexto folio ex parte nigra. The note is taken up by another marginal note written against the entry for 137: alia fere concordat infra sexto folio ex parte nigra. The land in Goodramgate from which the 13s. 4d. came was later granted by Romeyn to the vicars: 137. 